OCPBUGS-12760: Add PrometheusRemoteStorageFailures runbook (#125)
openshift/runbooks: alerts/cluster-monitoring-operator/PrometheusRemoteStorageFailures.md

# PrometheusRemoteStorageFailures

## Meaning

The `PrometheusRemoteStorageFailures` alert triggers when there has been
a constant increase in failures sending samples to the remote storage for more

> than 15 minutes, both in CMO Prometheus or in UWM.

Reviewer: We don't use CMO and UWM in user-facing docs but rather "Platform Prometheus" and "user-defined Prometheus".

# PrometheusRemoteStorageFailures

## Meaning

The `PrometheusRemoteStorageFailures` alert triggers when there has been
a constant increase in failures sending samples to the remote storage for more

> than 15 minutes, both in plaform Prometheus or in user-defined Prometheus.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
than 15 minutes, in either the platform Prometheus or a user-workload Prometheus instance
```

Reviewer 2: typo: platform

## Impact

Prometheus samples in storage might be missing or inaccurate.

## Diagnosis

> 1. Determine whether the alert has triggered for the instance of Prometheus used

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Determine whether the alert was triggered for the instance of Prometheus used
```

Author: reworded to `has been triggeredp

> 1. Determine whether the alert has triggered for the instance of Prometheus used

Reviewer 2: Also how about 

```
Determine if the alert has been triggered for the Prometheus instance used for default cluster monitoring or for the instance that monitors user-defined projects by checking the alert message's `namespace` label. The namespace value will indicate the Prometheus instance. E.g.  `openshift-monitoring` for default cluster monitoring and `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` for user workload monitoring.
```

> for default cluster monitoring or for the instance that monitors user-defined

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for default cluster monitoring or for the instance that monitors user-defined 
```
User defined projects seems a bit confusing but I don't have a better suggestion as well :)

projects by viewing the alert message's `namespace` label: the namespace for
default cluster monitoring is `openshift-monitoring`; the namespace for user
workload monitoring is `openshift-user-workload-monitoring`.

2. Review the logs for the affected Prometheus instance:

    ```console
    $ NAMESPACE='<value of namespace label from alert>'

    $ oc -n $NAMESPACE logs -l 'app=prometheus'

>     level=error ... msg="Failed to send batch, retrying" ...

Reviewer 2: I tested this on a cluster and `app=prometheus` gives me `No resources found in openshift-monitoring namespace.` 
did you mean `oc logs -l 'app.kubernetes.io/component=prometheus'`

    ```

> 3. Check prometheus logs and remote storage logs. Investigate network issues.
>    Check configs and credentials.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Check prometheus logs and remote storage logs. 
4. Investigate network issues. Check configs and credentials.
```

# PrometheusRemoteStorageFailures

## Meaning

The `PrometheusRemoteStorageFailures` alert triggers when there has been
a constant increase in failures sending samples to the remote storage for more
than 15 minutes, in either the platform Prometheus or a user-defined Prometheus
instance.

## Impact

> Prometheus samples in storage might be missing or inaccurate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Prometheus samples in remote storage might be missing or inaccurate.
```

## Diagnosis

> 1. Determine if the alert has been triggered for the instance of Prometheusi

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Determine if the alert has been triggered for the instance of Prometheus
```

Author: That's what you get by editing with vim now and then xD

   instance used for default cluster monitoring or for the instance that
   monitors user-defined projects by checking the alert message's `namespace`
   label. The namespace value will indicate the Prometheus instance.

   E.g. `openshift-monitoring` for default platform monitoring and
   `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` for user-defined monitoring.

2. Review the logs for the affected Prometheus instance:

   ```console

>    $ NAMESPACE='<value of namespace label from alert>'

Reviewer: The alert should also carry the pod name which identifies exactly which pod to look at.

Author: I'm already pointing to the`app.kubernetes.io/component=prometheus` label, would you specify anything further?

   $ oc -n $NAMESPACE logs -l 'app.kubernetes.io/component=prometheus'
   level=error ... msg="Failed to send batch, retrying" ...
   ```

3. Check prometheus logs and remote storage logs.

> 4. Investigate network issues. Check configs and credentials.

Reviewer: redundant with the mitigation part?

> ## Mitigation

Reviewer: I would classify possible errors like:
* Failure to authenticate to the remote storage system => check the authentication parameters in the CMO and user-workload configmaps.
* Requests hitting rate-limits => tweak the queue configuration in the CMO and user-workload configmaps and/or limit the number of samples being sent.
* 5xx HTTP errors => check the remote storage system's logs.

Author: added this as some sample debugging guidelines.

Reviewer 3: I'd love to see @simonpasquier 's examples more explicitly. Maybe something along the lines of

```
This alert indicates an issue in Prometheus' communication with the remote system.
The cause can be on either the Prometheus side or the remote side. Common issues are:
- _what Simon said_
```

Author: I put that above the Diagnosis, but I'll add that specific comment there as well, thanks!

# PrometheusRemoteStorageFailures

## Meaning

The `PrometheusRemoteStorageFailures` alert triggers when there has been
a constant increase in failures sending samples to the remote storage for more
than 15 minutes, in either the platform Prometheus or a user-defined monitoring
Prometheus pods..

## Impact

> Prometheus samples in remote storage might be missing.

Reviewer 3: Maybe add
`Depending on the remote_write pipeline configuration, prometheus memory usage might increase while pending samples are queued.`

Author: Done

## Diagnosis

* Determine if the alert has been triggered for the instance of Prometheus
  instance used for default cluster monitoring or for the instance that
  monitors user-defined projects by checking the alert message's `namespace`
  label. The namespace value will indicate the Prometheus instance.

  E.g. `openshift-monitoring` for default platform monitoring and
  `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` for user-defined monitoring.

* Review the logs for the affected Prometheus instance:

  ```console
  $ NAMESPACE='<value of namespace label from alert>'

  $ oc -n $NAMESPACE logs -l 'app.kubernetes.io/component=prometheus'
  level=error ... msg="Failed to send batch, retrying" ...
  ```

* Check prometheus logs and remote storage logs. Some examples of common
  issues are:

  * Failure to authenticate to the remote storage system
    * Check the authentication parameters in the CMO and user-workload
      configmaps.

  * Requests hitting rate-limits
    * Tweak the queue configuration in the CMO and user-workload configmaps
      and/or limit the number of samples being sent.

  * 5xx HTTP errors
    * Check the remote storage system's logs.

## Mitigation

> If the logs indicate a syntax or other configuration error, troubleshoot the

Reviewer 3: would think that a syntax error doesn't trigger this alert, since the config won't make it to prometheus.

Author: I'll just remove that part.

# PrometheusRemoteStorageFailures

## Meaning

> The `PrometheusRemoteStorageFailures` alert triggers when there has been
> a constant increase in failures sending samples to the remote storage for more
> than 15 minutes, in either the platform Prometheus or a user-defined monitoring
> Prometheus pods..

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The `PrometheusRemoteStorageFailures` alert triggers when failures to send samples to  remote storage have been constantly increasing for more
than 15 minutes for either platform Prometheus pods or user-defined monitoring
Prometheus pods.
```

Author: done!

## Impact

Prometheus samples in remote storage might be missing. Depending on the

> remote_write pipeline configuration, prometheus memory usage might increase

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`remote_write` pipeline configuration, Prometheus memory usage might increase
```

while pending samples are queued.

## Diagnosis

> * Determine if the alert has been triggered for the instance of Prometheus
>   instance used for default cluster monitoring or for the instance that
>   monitors user-defined projects by checking the alert message's `namespace`
>   label. The namespace value will indicate the Prometheus instance.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Check the `namespace` label in the alert message to determine if the alert was triggered for the instance of Prometheus used for default cluster monitoring or for the instance that monitors user-defined projects. The `namespace` value indicates the Prometheus instance.
```

>   E.g. `openshift-monitoring` for default platform monitoring and
>   `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` for user-defined monitoring.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

* Review the logs for the affected Prometheus instance:

  ```console
  $ NAMESPACE='<value of namespace label from alert>'

  $ oc -n $NAMESPACE logs -l 'app.kubernetes.io/component=prometheus'
  level=error ... msg="Failed to send batch, retrying" ...
  ```

> * Check prometheus logs and remote storage logs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Review the Prometheus logs and the remote storage logs.
```

## Mitigation

> This alert indicates an issue in Prometheus' communication with the remote

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This alert fires when Prometheus has an issue communicating with the remote
```

system. The cause can be on either the Prometheus side or the remote side.

> Common issues are:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Common issues that can cause the alert to fire include the following:
```

> * Failure to authenticate to the remote storage system

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* **Cause**: Failure to authenticate to the remote storage system
```

>   * Check the authentication parameters in the CMO and user-workload

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * **Mitigation**: Verify that the authentication parameters in the Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) or in the user workload are correct.
```

>       configmaps.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

Author: will drop this one as per the change on the above suggestion.

> * Requests hitting rate-limits

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* **Cause**: Requests hitting rate-limits.
```

>   * Tweak the queue configuration in the CMO and user-workload configmaps

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * **Mitigation**: Tweak the queue configuration in the CMO and user-workload config maps
```

      and/or limit the number of samples being sent.

> * 5xx HTTP errors

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* **Cause**: 5_xx_ HTTP errors.
```

>   * Check the remote storage system's logs.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  * **Mitigation**: Review the logs on for the remote storage system.
```

If the logs indicate a  configuration error, troubleshoot the issue. Note

> that the issue could be related to networking or a bad configuration.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
that the issue might be related to general networking issues or a bad configuration.
```

> It may also be that the amount of data sent to the remote system may be too
> high for a given network speed. You may need to limit which metrics to send in
> order to minimize transfers.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The cause might also be that the amount of data sent to the remote system is too
high for a given network speed. If so, minimize transfers by limiting which metrics are sent to remote storage.
```

> Besides that, checking `cluster-network-operator`  may also help debugging in
> the above specified network issues case..

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Additionally, you can check the `cluster-network-operator` configuration to help debug 
possible networking issues.
```
